# BeePopulationProject(TimeSeries)
Introduction				 							

Honeybees are the most essential natural force in sustaining life on Earth. They do this via pollination. Honeybees are at least 80% of all natural pollinators, and are responsible for an estimated $2 billion in crop yield. In order to understand how the honeybees are affected adversely, one must understand the makeup of a colony. The population of a honeybee colony varies with the season. On average, there are 60,000 adult female worker bees, 10,000-30,000 egg/larvae/pupae (the brood), hundreds of male drones, and a single fertile queen bee, responsible for egg laying. The queen begins laying eggs at an increasing rate after the winter in February until mid summer. Then, from August to mid-October, the egg-laying rate decreases until it stops for the winter. To maintain the colony, the worker bees must forage, pollinate, produce honey, and care for the next generation. In late summer to fall, the rate of egg laying declines, eventually stopping completely mid October. Naturally, the size of the honeybee colony declines in the winter.
Bees typically live longer in the winter to make up for the lack of egg-laying, but still do die. If too many bees die during the winter, there will be not enough bees to do the work needed to raise the brood. This failure of the colony due to wintering loss is called Colony Collapse Disorder. There are many causes for CCD, including pesticide use, stripping the soil via intensive agriculture, increasingly extreme winter weather, and infectious mites, namely Varrora destructor, which is the focus of this paper. Varrora destructor’s natural host is the Asiatic honey bee, Apis cerana. However, in the 1950s/1960s, scientists documented a shift to the western honey bee Apis mellifera. These mites then rapidly spread all over the west. 
Varrora destructor mites not only ectoparasitically feed on the bees but also transmit a wide array of deadly viruses. One of the most impactful of these is the Acute Bee Paralysis Virus, or ABPV for short. Infected bees lose the ability to fly, experience hair loss, and tremble uncontrollably. Once the mites enter the hive, they enter the honeybee brood cell before it is capped. Once capped, the mite feeds on the developing bee, lays eggs, and makes a feeding site for her offspring. Once the bee leaves the cell, the immature female mite dies. However, the immature male mite(s) survive. The adult female mite attached to the adult bee is called the phoretic stage. In this stage, an uninfected bee can become infected via infected mite. Additionally, an uninfected mite can become infected by attaching to an infected bee. ABPV is a primary cause of bee mortality. The pupae and adult bees that become infected die very quickly. 
Because the nature of Acute Bee Paralysis Virus and Varrora destructor mites is so integrated, one must study them together. Ratti, Kevan, and Eberl’s model takes into account the complexity of  uninfected bee - infected bee - uninfected mite - infected mite dynamics, which is reflected in the variables of the model. M is the number of mites infesting the colony, and the dependent variable m is the number of mites carrying ABPV. Similarly, x is the number of honeybees that are virus-free and y is the number of infected honeybees. This is a four-dimensional system, and because of all of the varying seasonal parameters, is also non-autonomous. First, Ratti Kevan and Eberl use the known methods to study the special case of constant coefficients for autonomous systems. Then, they investigate using computer simulations under what conditions, if any, does a stable and working bee colony that becomes infested with Varrora destructor mites fight off the Acute Bee Paralysis Virus. 
After conducting the simulation, we understand that naturally, the population of bees and mites fluctuate periodically, forever. When the virus is introduced, the bee population peaks then declines, rises up to a peak that is lower than the previous one and again declines until its collapse, which usually takes a little over 1400 days. We can see that even with a substantially sized colony, the mites will eventually cause the colony to collapse. 
The implications of our simulated results are quite severe; there is an infectious mite population wreaking havoc on western bee populations. Because western bees are not the natural host, the mites are able to do more damage. This puts the whole ecosystem out of homeostasis. The decline of the bee population due to parasitic and infectious mites damages crop yield tremendously, therefore affecting our farmed food supply greatly. We need to work together with scientists and figure out how to mediate the effects of the mites, and lessen the blow that the bee population is taking, for once they are gone, they will not come back. 
One of the limitations that this model embodies is that it operates under the assumption that each season is the same amount of days. This is not true in real life. Additionally, the model does not take into account the varying of the environmental conditions; this would play out differently in Canada versus southern California. Additionally, the model assumes that the queen bee is never affected by the mites and therefore virus, and that an old queen bee is replaced without the loss of worker bees. Each year is assumed to be identical, so that the parameters are periodic without accounting for the differences in environment and human activities. The seasonally averaged parameters are just that, an average, and not reflective of the possibility in range. 
